I'm not nervous. I'm just excited. All right
So my name is Ryan Timpe. I'm a senior data scientist at the Lego group on the marketing effectiveness team. I
Basically build marketing mixed models in R to help the Lego group
optimize all their different forms of media spending
You can find me on Twitter at at Ryan Timpe where I like to tweet about my dog
Dinosaurs and all the fun things I do in R
You can also check out my Twitter for exclusive bonus content to this talk that did not make the cut
So I'm here today to talk to you about learning R by creating side projects
Side projects have been a critical part of my learning experience in R and I want to share some of those experiences with you today
Whenever I'm interested in learning a new package or a new technical concept
I have to come up with a project design for me to learn it and then once I'm comfortable I can begin using it in
my work
So for example two years ago when tidy text came out I used data science to answer this really important question
Which season of the Golden Girls should I watch when playing a drinking game?
Yeah, this is silly and stupid, but that's my point
So R is always changing and we're always learning and so sometimes it feels like a struggle to keep up with all the new technology
and packages and
Over my eight or so years of using and learning R
I found that side projects really work well for me to learn these new tools on my own terms
And then once I'm comfortable I can use them in my work
So I like to come up with this really ridiculous question like the Golden Girls drinking game
And this works for me because I get to learn the new tool
Using data and a topic that I'm already familiar with so the only unknown for me is the new tool itself
So this is what I did with tidy text if you're not familiar
Tidy text is in packaged by Julia Silke and David Robinson that can take text and turn it into a tidy data table
It's a really powerful tool that can make possible data from anything
From literature to financial earnings reports or in my case TV show scripts
And I just love the idea of these two professional programmers out there making this really powerful tool for the R community
And I'm just using it to get drunk
But you know what that worked so I can make this look a lot more like data science with some charts
So again if you and your friends are hanging out one night and playing the Golden Girls drinking game
Which season should you watch to maximize your drink consumption?
So if you're responsible and not familiar with drinking games you basically watch a television show
And each time one of the characters performs a specific action you take a sip of your drink
so for the Golden Girls when Rose talks about her hometown of st. Olaf Dorothy talks about her ex-husband Stan or
When any of the women eat cheesecake you're gonna drink
In looking at this lovely beach colored bar chart on the left I proved with data science
I remind you that if you're going to play the Golden Girls drinking game, and you want to drink the most watch season 5
And that's because in the later episodes of the season Rose talks about her hometown a lot
And you're gonna drink about 10 more drinks that season than season 6
that said
I'm not sure how much of a good idea it is to watch an entire season of a TV show for one drinking game
Definitely not healthy so
Instead look at the other chart on the right
this shows the cumulative drinks per minute for each of the seasons and
Here you can see that maybe seasons 4 or 6 are gonna be a better idea for you because they ramp up the drinks quickly
in the first 100 minutes
If you watch season 5 you need to watch 400 minutes of the show or 16 episodes to exceed your drink consumption from season 4
or 6
So this is how I learned tidy text. I hope you're proud of me
And but I get it I
Tidy text I use it all the time now in all my projects both at work and for side projects
And I get it you'd like Golden Girls is a very old show and you might not be interested in that
So we can use tidy text for a lot of other things
Like the good place drinking game
Because once you learn how to do it once it's really easy to repeat
So here you drink any every time Eleanor says fork or Janet reminds someone that she's not a girl
Or Janet reminds someone that she's not a girl and here you're gonna watch season 1 or the Jurassic Park drinking game
Literally any drinking game you give me the the TV show or a movie and I'll solve it for you
using tidy text
And so here we now know that if you watch the two-hour movie
you're gonna consume 80 drinks during the course of that movie and
This one's a little bit different because we're not optimizing a problem. There's only one movie or one movie that matters and
But you know what? I love the movie
I already have the tools with tidy text and I already have the data. So I just why not make this chart
So I already had the data because of a different mini side project I did when a different new package came out
So I want to learn how to make animated GG
GG plots with the GG animate package and again using data that means something for me. It's just way more fun
So I spent three days watching Jurassic Park I paused the movie every few seconds
To figure out which characters were in the scene to count all the dinosaurs on the screen
And to just jot down all the locations
And I did this all for data science
So here we have animated character paths of the main characters in Jurassic Park and where they move throughout the movie
We have three maps we have the globe if they move from the Badlands where they're digging up the bones to the island itself
We have a map of the island in the middle where they moved between the different dinosaur exhibits
and
then we have a map of the visitor center with the interior scenes and
In the middle every time a dinosaur eats one of the characters a little skull emoji pops up
So this is a small silly project
but I learned GG animate this way and now like I learned all the
Features and transition elements and how to use them and when to use them and that set me up for being able to use it
in some of my more serious work
Sorry
Other times I
Approach the learning experience from the other side around I dream up a really fun project
I want to complete with R, but I don't have the tools to do so yet
So take a look at this chart, this is a rolling average of some mortality data from the United States
It's generally decreasing. So that's a really good thing
Take another look though and look closely
Do you think maybe?
Does this chart look like a dinosaur to you?
and
Spoiler alert. The answer is yes
Um, it looks just like a dinosaur
So doodling on charts is a lot of fun I do it a lot especially with tablets, yeah
But for this project I wanted a lot of doodles like thousands of them
So in this case getting computer to doodle for me was gonna be way more fun
So here we have another dinosaur doodle drawn from this data
But this doodle was made with a lot of data science and data science that can create any dinosaur from any data
Yeah problems you never knew you had
So a few years ago it seemed like everyone out there was building Twitter bots
And Twitter bot is a win-win a computer does all the work and a human gets all the credit all the Twitter likes and all
The retweets and I wanted in on this
So I built data sores which takes a time series of data
And it finds a dinosaur outline that's closely correlated with it
It then redraws a dinosaur using that time series as the outline colors it in
And displays it on this fun poster
R sends out a tweet rinse and repeat every few hours forever and you have a Twitter bot
The thing is when I set out to do this, I did not know how to do this
my knowledge of R at the time was very limited to data manipulation and
Regressions and I didn't really have the tools to accomplish my goals here. So doing this I learned a lot of new packages
So I started with what I could do
And then I would plan out the next step whenever there's a roadblock. I
Would do some research to see what tools and packages were available for me to accomplish this and then
Yeah, I would get it to work for data source
I learned the package along the way and I move on to the next one
So some examples of this are I use the final pick API to actually get all these dinosaur images onto my computer
What's a
Geom raster actually lets me draw the dinosaur on a Gigi plot
Grid extra to arrange a lot of Gigi plots on the same chart
Our vests because I wanted trivia facts to make this more scientific. So on the bottom I had a scrape Wikipedia to display some facts
You see the fun color patterns on that. I had to relearn some basic trigonometry from high school because that's all sines and cosines
Our tweet in the Twitter API to put that into a path or a tweet and then batch processing
So I did not have to hit the enter button every time I wanted to make one of these
So the output of this is really silly
But I learned a ton of new tools that I use every day as at my work as a data scientist
Not the dinosaur drawing part, but everything else
And so solving this silly problem just made me a much better data scientist
Before I move on take one more look at that dinosaur
We use data science to make this really cool dinosaur
Right now to only exist on my computer, but pretend it's real for a second. We have a brand new problem
What do we name it?
Or if you're a paleontologist and you are about to publish this brand new dinosaur discovery
What are you gonna call it?
So from what I can tell and I'm not a paleontologist
Um
Naming a dinosaur is a huge privilege
Like there's these really great powerful sounding ones that are used like that use Greek and Latin like brontosaurus
Which means thunder lizard tyrannosaurus rex, which means the tyrant lizard king and I want to name my dinosaur something really cool, too
But I don't know Greek and I don't know Latin
So in this case, I'm going to introduce you to my friend deep learning and artificial intelligence
quite possibly the trendiest of the data sciences
So for this side project
I use someone else's side project because I saw someone do a really cool side project and I was like I could do that too
And I did it
So Jacqueline no less you may have seen here give a talk a few hours ago
with Heather no less
Published a really fun project using recurrent neural networks
To generate new offensive license plates from a list of plates that had been banned in Arizona
So people in Arizona, I guess sent out like they try to get some vanity license plates with bad words on them
Arizona said no way and then he kept a list of those words
So she used that as her training set and she generated this list and a small sample is there
And along with her output she shared her code and a blog post of explaining some of the math and tricks behind the algorithm
Thanks to open source. I click the clone button on her repo and I change it to work for extinct reptile names
so
After a few minutes my computer spat out a list of brand-new never-before-seen awesome dinosaur names
So here we I can't say them all. Uh here we have Sarasaurus
metroterosops
Dino-ryrosaurus
Alloraptor all these really awesome sounding names that don't yet have an actual animal attached to them
Um
But seriously, I like this project because it lowered the barriers of entry for me to begin using deep learning with Keras and R
So AI and deep learning or buzzwords and data science closely associated with advanced image recognition and natural language
Processing and that's true
But that association can make it super daunting
For someone like me who is new to deep learning to actually start using a deep learning project
So when I saw something using deep learning as simple with as simple as license plates
I was really excited to leverage Jacqueline's work with my own data
So I can begin building my own models and begin using deep learning and Keras in my work
and then finally
Side projects are great because sometimes they can become real things and land you a job
So a while before I joined my current company
I wanted to figure out how to use the tidyverse to build a Lego mosaic and to build it as cheaply as possible
And so it's a relatively simple problem
You take an image you pixelate it you change every pixel to a Lego color
And effectively you have bricks and then you combine single adjacent pixels or bricks of the same color
And that saves you money and so I shared this on Twitter and a blog post and
People really liked it and that motivated me to keep on working on it. And so I kept on developing this I
Added a bunch of new features some that were requested some that I just wanted to do. I
learned a lot of packages to make it work and
I figured out how to put it into a package of its own and then eventually I ended up with Bricker
So Bricker is an R package also a side project
That can take an image in a GG plot and turn it into Lego bricks
So you feed the function an image and it returns a Lego version of it as well as the instructions
You need to build it and then all the pieces you need to build it
It also can take a list of instructions and then create a 3d Lego model for you
Um, this in itself is a side project. Oh, thank you
I'll allow it
So this in itself was a side project within a side project because I really wanted to learn Tyler Morgan walls ray shader package
But again using data. I want to use not his data. So
Instead of maps and topography and boring stuff. I used it to make Lego bricks
But in the process of doing this I learned so much about his package how to make it work
that in later versions actually
Switched from relying on his package directly and instead uses underlying source code as a jumping-off point to get my project to work
But to be honest the cool factor is pretty high with this the usefulness factor is pretty low
No, really low. Yeah
But developing this has really helped me to learn a ton of new things about our
There are so many tools needed to get a package working
And what were these working well and then to ensure that it builds correctly for many people and is as accessible as possible to as
many people as possible
In doing this and I'm still definitely working on it. This is not on cran because it's too much work
Really challenges me as a programmer
And then beyond that building brick as a side project really helped with my portfolio
So around the time I was working on this the Lego group decided to hire data scientists in the u.s
I just let me tell you this already having a portfolio of work idolizing your future employer can do wonders for your job application
Yeah
And now I'm here standing in front of you today at this super serious conference talking about drinking games
I'm pretty sure I professionally peaked
So there we have it
Working on these humorous side projects really open some doors and develop me as an our programmer
Side projects provide a safe learning environment to enable you to set yourself up so you can succeed and learn on your own terms
And then building side products can create new resources for yourself and others
Making it so much easier for other people out there to learn from the work that you did and
I hope maybe I've inspired some of you to kind of go home with all these new skills that you've learned over today and you
Will learn tomorrow and create some really cool side projects and share them with me
So thank you. I am happy to take any questions and while we wait. Oh, thank you
One
Why we wait you can check out the office drinking game, all right
Okay, so we have time for a few questions
So I'm not tethered to it, okay, so it looks like one popular question is how do you find time for side projects?
Yeah, I was expecting that
I mean, I'm definitely privileged because I have a lot of free time
I'm just saying or I don't have any kids right now. So that's a big thing
But I stopped playing video games at one point. And so I found a lot of free time, but
That's it
Another question we have from the Jacqueline Nolas who inspired one of your projects
How did you make the background maps for the Jurassic Park GG animate?
So I'm not a drawer but I
Got a drawing program on my iPad and traced it with an SVG and then loaded the SVG into the GG plot
Which I originally had a slide on but I had to cut it
Easy question I like this
So maybe one final question and then we might get the next speaker set up
Have you made charts of the variation how much you have to drink per episode I
Mean the one we're showing on the screen right here still up is it? Yes, that's actually per episode for the office
I haven't done it for the Golden Girls
But yeah in theory, yes, but I've never played this game any of these games just putting that out there
It's purely for academic research
Well, I'd said that was the last question, but I have one more question that's really good and we have time you okay, okay
So where do you get inspiration for new side projects? I?
Was a weird kid
These things come to me and I just have to do it. So like I
Don't know. Yeah, that's it's my brain wiring. Sorry
So then my question is are you a Golden Girls fan?
Okay, good
Okay, good, so what is your favorite character
Okay, mine's Rose but
Yeah, you got to go with one, okay, thank you Ryan